Nutrition information and the menopause: An online survey of perimenopausal and menopausal women
Eleanor Davies 1,✉, Vanessa Halliday 1
Author information
Article notes
Copyright and License information
PMCID: PMC12209543  PMID: 39668807
Abstract
Objective
This study aimed to explore where perimenopausal and menopausal women get their nutrition information from, and how reliable they perceive these sources to be.
Study design
This was a cross-sectional study that used an online survey to collect data about nutrition information seeking habits. The survey was generated using the Qualtrics software and promoted via social media. The convenience sample included women over the age of 40 years living in the UK. Main outcome measures: Quantitative data.
Results
Two hundred and sixty-nine responses were analysed. The majority of respondents were over the age of 50, and from a white British background. Online sources were most commonly used by women to access nutrition information, namely official websites such as the British Menopause Society (BMS) and National Health Service (NHS) websites. The majority of participants believed that these, along with research papers, were the most reliable sources. However, receiving nutrition information from healthcare professionals was most likely to cause women to change their behaviour towards nutrition. The majority of women were interested in receiving targeted menopausal nutrition information, and this would ideally be from official websites or their healthcare professionals.
Conclusions
Findings from this study suggest that women predominantly rely on online sources for information about nutrition, perceiving official websites as reliable sources. There is a demand among women for tailored nutritional guidance during the menopausal transition, emphasising the importance of providing accessible and targeted resources to support women’s health needs during this life stage.

Metabolic Effects of Perimenopause (MAAP)Study Overview
Brief Summary
Starting in early-perimenopause, changes in systemic and tissue level metabolism result in an accelerated loss of muscle mass and an increase in body fat. Our preliminary work indicates that metabolic alterations, specifically a decrease in whole-body protein balance, increase in abdominal adiposity, and reduced metabolic flexibility during exercise is most evident in perimenopause. Exercise is a potent stimulator of skeletal muscle insulin sensitivity. High intensity interval training (HIIT) has been shown to be an effective exercise strategy to support cardiometabolic health in overweight and obese young women. Skeletal muscle is critical to maintaining metabolic health and functionality across the lifespan, and is considered the primary diver of whole-body insulin resistance.There is a significant decrease in muscle mass across the menopause transition, which is often exacerbated by a significant gain in fat mass and visceral fat. Protein consumption prior to HIIT has resulted in improvements in energy expenditure and fat oxidation in young women. The overarching objective of this study is to determine the metabolic response of HIIT compared to traditional aerobic exercise in early and late perimenopausal women. Aim 1 will examine the metabolic responses (glucose, insulin sensitivity, energy expenditure) of HIIT vs aerobic exercise, combined with pre-exercise carbohydrate or protein ingestion, in overweight/obese (BMI: 28-40 Kg/m^2) early and late perimenopausal women. Aim 2 will explore the impact of perimenopause on the fat oxidation and protein turnover before and after exercise. Lastly, aim 3 will explore the modulating effect of intramuscular fat on these metabolic outcomes.
National i rosechno Monicion e
National Center for Biotechnology Information ‎<Сообщение изменено>
